# Table of contents

1) [Character creation](#1-character-creation)  
  1.1) [Character creation: Concept](#1.1-character-creation-concept)  
  1.2) [Abilities](#1.2-character-creation-abilities)  
  1.3) [Stats](#1.3-haracter-creation-stats)  
  1.4) [Background](#1.4-character-creation-background)  
2) [Conflict](#2-conflict)  
  2.1) [Structure](#2.1-Conflict-Structure)  
  2.2) [Call action](#2.2-Conflict-Call-action)  
  2.3) [Call effect](#2.3-Conflict-Call-effect)  
3) [Further options](#3-Further-options)  
4) [Character progression](#4-Character-progression)  
5) [Character story arc](#5-Character-story-arc)  


<details>
  <summary>Click to expand</summary>
  One other note on the game, which I think gives an idea of the tone. The first adventure will be what the makers of the game term a Funnel.
</details>

1) Character creation
---------------------

## 1.1) Character creation: Concept
[back to Table of contents](#table-of-contents)

> **Concept:** Define your character using two or three descriptive words. This concept can be as simple as the common race/class/specialization combination'

## 1.2) Character creation: Abilities
[back to Table of contents](#table-of-contents)

> **Racial ability:** Suggest a race for your character. Any race is valid so you can play classic races, modification of these (twisted elves, gracious dwarves) or something totally new (energetic half-koalas, sentient chairs). Think what would be the most striking characteristic of your race. (As a sentient chair, you can easily hide among other furniture of similar taste, so the racial ability Hide in the Furniture would be suitable). You can add one more positive racial trait by also taking one negative racial to balance. 

> **Cultural ability:** Suggest a culture's, profession's or group's ability that your character acquired due to his upbringing and experience. Note that this could be a cross-race or cross-borders trait shared by many members of a region or vocation. Let's say a player wants to play a noble crusader. Nobles are all posh bastards exploiting our good proletarian comrades regardless of their origin and crusaders are all the same throughout the realms, because they have a unifying set of beliefs. A possible cultural trait related to the professional training and social class could be Knight in Shining Armour: you polish your armour so well and so often that the light reflected on it is too bright for most mortal eyes to handle. Just as for the racial ability you can add one more positive cultural trait by also taking one negative trait to balance.

> **Personal ability:** If the racial ability is acquired from nature and cultural ability comes from nurture, then the personal ability is the result of experience. Your personal ability is that one thing you learned due to your unique experiences. Maybe it is something from your culture, profession or training that you mastered particularly well, or maybe it is something you acquired through practicing a hobby or exploring and studying alternative methods Did you hit your head when you were a child and gained telepathic powers? Maybe you have been chosen by a greater deity and you have some holy power. Did you learn or develop a new technique as a royal guard? Maybe you learned from your great-cousin how to trick old ladies to get their fortune? Once again, you can add one more personal ability, but the second one will require a potential setback. 

> **Frustration:** Adventuring is a difficult, stressful and frustrating activity. How will you react under stress, when the difficulties of the adventure are too much and you can't handle the frustration of the constant struggling? This trait will determine how the character reacts when mentally overwhelmed by the stress of the adventure. 

## 1.3) Character creation: Stats
[back to Table of contents](#table-of-contents)

> **Attributes:** Attributes reflect the general aptitudes the character have for specific situations. These can be changed, added and removed to fit any setting or game style, but the main attributes should be simple and clear, while allowing broad character differences.
    * *Combat:* Reflects an extensive battle and combat training, both psychical and mental. Due to this above average training, the character gains a bonus to skills when in a combat scene that is, one involving fights and any other violent confrontations (for example casting, defending, attacking).
    * *Social:* Reflects an extensive understanding of others' motives, desires and feelings. Due to this above average understanding, the character gains a bonus when interacting with other sentient creatures non-violently (for example lie to a guard, calm a dog, explain to aliens you receive them in peace).
    * *Explore:* Reflects a particular eye for details and understanding what they mean. Due to this above average attention, the character gains a bonus when interacting with objects (for example, searching for papers, tracking an animal, deciphering a book)
    Similarly, characters that are below average will gain a situational penalty on their skills.
By default, all attributes start at 0, which represent the average Joe, that mighty hero who excels at nothing but also is not crap at anything! However, a player can choose one single attribute that his character excels at, by sacrificing another attribute. The idea is that if a character spent more time than usual practicing something, then it stands to reason that it also spent less time than usual doing something else. For example, a mighty wizard that spent years in a room reading ancient scrolls may have grown fat and lazy and have his physical capacity reduced

> **Training:** A second type of attributes can be considered. The role of these attributes is to control access to specific skills and actions and to prevent untrained characters from using them. Consider which specialized skills your character is trained with and add them to your training section.
    Let's take the example of magic and casters. Because access to magic varies from setting to setting, it can be added as a training attribute. The Magic Attribute's main function is as a "gate" that controls how easy or difficult it is for any character to access magic powers.
    1) Is magic commonplace and every player can attempt casting a spell? There is no need to use Magic as a training attribute in this case, because training is not required to use it. You can consider adding it as a main attribute if it is that relevant to the setting, as it can add new situational bonus to the game, offering a finer control and skill definition.
    2) Is magic something most players can't do without some level of studying and learning? Then set Magic to either trained or untrained and limit its use to those trained. Also consider if and how characters can gain training during the game.
    3) Is magic so rare and precious that only a selected few will ever dream of using it after studying for a very long time? Set the Magic as a training attribute as before, but feel free to require a cost of training, which could be a penalty on another attribute, requirement for expensive resources and materials or something else that will force the player to consider his choice carefully. Magic is so powerful and rare in this case that its choice is actively penalized.
    The previous case, illustrates an example of how a training attribute can be used to control access to certain skills. However, training attributes could also be dependent on the main attributes. Let's think about another example. Heavy armour is usually something with a highly restrictive use. It requires strong, highly trained, combat-focused characters. How would this be reflected in this system? Simply give it a dependency that is, make it depend on something else. In this case, Heavy armour can be a training attribute which depends on the combat attribute being 1, so only players that are physically trained and combat-focused can be trained on using heavy armour.
    Note that these ideas can be extended to any other attributes. Are the players from a peace-loving community? You can make Violence a training attribute! Do they live in a realm that centralizes and monopolizes the means of violence? Then maybe adding a Weapons training attribute could reflect that!

> **Skills:** If the attributes are what distinguishes the characters' broad strengths or weaknesses, skills are the fine differences that will make a character unique. Skills refer to anything a character may do, including using weapons, casting spells or jumping on one foot, binge watching Netflix all night, and how good the character is at doing that thing. While the attributes are a small set of limited options, the idea is to have a free and fluid skills list, allowing skills to be made up on the fly. All skills start at level 0. Feel free to suggest any number of skills your character has some with experience. From these, define which you are pursuing (level 1), which you are an apprentice of (level 2) and a few you are experienced with (level 3). The chosen skills should reflect the characters aptitudes including combat skills, functional skills and social skills! The success probabilities are very low at low skill levels, so focusing on just one of these aspects may result in clearly unbalanced characters with obvious weakness. The suggested skills need to reflect a similar and related group of actions, such as running, axe handling, dodging, fire spells and so on.
*Skill level (rough interpretation)*
* Ignorant (lv0): I have never heard of it but I'll try it (11% success)
* Pursuing (lv1): Understand the basics of what it is, but nothing in depth (24% success)
* Apprentice (lv2): I have used it for at least a few times and have a good grasp of the basics and uses (41% success)
* Experienced (lv3): I have used on it regular basis and I am comfortable using it (54% success)
* Expert (lv4): I know have a complex understanding of it (73% success)
* Master (lv5): I am a vault of knowledge (79% success)
*Skill detail* The details by which skills need to be defined depends heavily on the duration and setting of the game. Let's consider a character that is a good swimmer. It could be considered that this is reflected by the athletics skill. However, athletics includes both running and swimming, which are fairly different activities. As such, athletics may be too general to describe the indented action, which is swimming. So if a skill can easily and logically be split into more than one skill, it probably should. On the other hand, there may be games and settings that required the distinction between related skills (underwater swimming, high sea swimming, swimming pool swimming) or even complementary skills (hold breath and underwater swimming). Note that most of these should be self corrected as the game progresses 
*Balancing characters*: It is important to ensure that all players have relatively balanced characters and no one is "over-qualified". A rough estimation of the skill levels for all characters would be to sum up all skill experience. Simply put, the experience (XP) is the equal to the level value, so a full level 3 skill requires 6 XP from level 0

## 1.4) Character creation: Background
[back to Table of contents](#table-of-contents)

> **Tying up:** Go back to your previous choices and make sure you have a background justification for each one (abilities, attributes and skills). In addition to that, consider where your character comes from (the town or region) and what are the important locations and organizations, famous or influential persons and even peculiar traditions and believes from there. Also, any adult person would have met someone else throughout his life right? Think about your character existing relationships. This could reflect relevant connections to specific organizations and institutions, important people that may play a significant role in the world or simply the friendly neighbour next door. Remember that people maintain both good and bad relationships, some being more cooperative other more competitive, so it may be interesting to consider one negative relationship for each two or three positive relationships to avoid having an "over-friendly" character. You can now tie all the information into a character background. 

> **Secret:** Unless the characters have known each other for a long time, chances are that they don't know everything about each other. Having hidden information that other players need to discover, will add twists and excitement to the story and to the characters. These do not have to be dark secrets (I worship the great evil demon and will offer the party as a sacrifice, first chance I get), but they should be though as the starting point for smaller character-centred stories within the game (Are they spying for some organization? Were they double-crossed by the King's Guard and are looking for revenge? Are they looking or their long lost brother or trying to stir up a war? Maybe the character origins cannot be known for some reason?). Add a secret event to your background that you can use for a personal quest. 
 
2) Conflict
-----------

## 2.1) Conflict: Structure
[back to Table of contents](#table-of-contents)

>**Turns:** This system uses turns to structure the game, where each turn is made by a single action of every player. This gives the opportunity for every player to take an action if he wishes to do so, preventing anyone from being overshadowed accidentally. However, players are allowed to pass and are not forced "to play" their turn. At the begging of each turn, the previous actions are resolved, the consequences described and the new situation introduced. As players take their turn, they first narrate the consequences of the previous player's actions and then their own actions, so even if they pass their turn, they still have some influence in what happens during the turn and contribute to the story development.

>**Conflict**: Conflict arises any time the outcome of the players' actions is uncertain. This could reflect any type of situation, from convincing a guide that travelling into the depth of a forest filled with evil creatures is a good idea, to finding your way in a maze-like temple or just the classic beating up some goblin under a tree. Since conflict describes any uncertain situation, there are various types of conflict. Simple conflicts require a single skill check to succeed (searching for traps, bribing a corrupt guard, striking a goblin). Other conflicts can require more than one single skill check. The prime example is combat, which is a structured conflict that requires successive checks to defeat the other group. In addition, there are other complex conflicts that are not structured but require completing multiple sub-tasks (A sceptical merchant needs to hear two good arguments that the piece you the players are trying to sell is really an important relic, continuously finding clues to track a dragon, dismantle a complex mechanism)

>**Attributes:** All conflicts have an associated attribute that provides situational bonuses or penalties to the characters. Violent conflicts are tied with the Combat attribute, non-violent interactions with other creatures are associated with the Social attribute and any conflict relating to non-living and non-sentient objects with be base on the Observe attribute.

>**Lethality:** Generally, conflict is not lethal, so the goal of the conflict is not to kill everything, but to gain the clear upper-hand (win) in the conflict. Lethality is recommended for dramatic purposes and as a logic results from a failed conflict. For example, failing to negotiate a pardon may result in the character's execution, while being chewed by a dragon is likely to deal lethal damage. The general idea is that, during a fight, the characters manage to avoid actually being slashed, pierced or bashed by their adversaries, but gradually put strain their body and mind doing so. As such, the characters lose their capacity to continue the conflict as they get into difficult positions, near-misses and some light scratches. Which means that, as in real life, if you get hit by a sword, to bleed to death. 

## 2.2) Conflict: Call action
[back to Table of contents](#table-of-contents)

> Whenever a player wants a character to do something that may fail, the player must call for a skill, roll 2d6 and confirm is the sum of the two dice is within the success range. As simple as that, the result is immediately known. One important thing to keep in mind is the number 5. This number shows up a lot in this system!

> **Success range**: The original method to estimate the success range is to add 5 to the resulting modifier (bonus and penalties). When rolling 2d6, any resulting sum that falls between 5 and that number (inclusive) is a success.
After some drinks in this tavern, I feel like exploring a bit more this new city and try to go to the next tavern. I have two levels of drunken walking so:
1) Reference number and lower bound of the success range is 5
2) My modifier is 2, so the upper bound of the success range is 7
3) If I roll a sum in this range (5,6 or 7) I can make it to the next tavern, otherwise I'll need to handle the failure. The success range, even though simple, is a fairly strange concept for many players and may take a while to get used to. An alternative method can be derived by again thinking 5. Note that the success range is 5+ (from 5 to 5+modifier). So if you roll 2d6-5 instead, the success range is centred to 5-5 to 5+modifier-5, that is from 0 to the modifier. The result is converted to a roll less than the modifier type of system!

> **Modifiers**: So, what is that modifier that is used to calculate the success range? That modifier is the sum of all bonuses and penalties that apply to the skill being checked. The basic modifier is the level of the skill being called by the player so being more skilled at something means that there are more values resulting in a successful action. In addition, each situation is associated with a main attribute, which value is also applied as either a (+1) bonus or a penalty (-1) depending on the value of the conflict attribute of a character. Note that this implies that the same skill can have very different success rates depending on the situation. For example, a character with a sword skill of 3 and Combat attribute of 1 and Social attribute of -1 will have a modifier of 4 when trying to cut down a goblin, but only a modifier of 2 if showing off his sword skills to someone. This can be interpreted as the character being awkward handling his sword, but it still cuts when it hits a goblin! Situational bonuses and penalties may additionally be applied referring either to conditions affecting the character (hidden, poisoned) or to particularly easy or difficult situations. The character dodge skill level is 4, with combat attribute 0. If the character gets into a tavern brawl with drunk clients, then maybe it is easier to dodge and a +1 bonus is applied for a resulting modifier of 5. Likewise, dodging a goblin's sword is ok, but dodging a giant's sweeping club, is probably more difficult, providing a -1 penalty for a modifier of 3. The last factor to take into account is the strain penalties. As a conflict progresses, it is likely that the characters will accumulate physical or mental strain from their efforts, reducing their conflict capacity until they are not able to continue. For each strain penalty taken, the character gets a cumulative -1 to the conflict attribute.
Two things of notice:
1) Any skill with a negative modifier automatically fails because 5 is removed from the success range (but can still wield experience). This means that rolling a sum value of 2,3 or 4 is an automatic fail.
2) It is also worth mentioning that equipment can also have an indirect effect on the modifier as it can change both the skill and attribute valuesIn summary, the success range is defined by:
1) The lower bound 5
2) The constant conflict attribute value (affected by rare equipment)
3) The chose skill level (affected by common equipment)
4) Effect and situational modifiers (called effects)
5) The ever increased strain penalty

> **New skills**: So... there is no need for a defined, detailed and extensive list of all skills that may be used during the game from the start right? But what if you want to call on a skill that "doesn't exist"? Well, simply add it to the list at level 0. If it wasn't there to start with, then you have no experience with it anyway. When a new skill is called, players should:
1) Is that action really not covered by any existing skill already? Note that how this question is approached will define how detailed a game's skill list is. Saying that the action jumping in distance is not covered by the skill jumping in altitude, means that the skill list is defined at a very fine level. This can work just as well as saying that jumping is jumping regardless of direction.
2) Does the character have any skills that may be related to the new one? If so, the character may be allowed to start with at most half the existing skill experience. It is easy to think that if someone can swim in a pool, then swimming in the sea (which is more difficult) is not such a challenge compared to someone that does not know how to swim at all!
3) Completely new skills are just that, new. No character has ever attempted it so they start at level 0. As the character rides his very medieval horse closer to the stunning and strange alien spaceship, the player just feels an intense need to flying it! The character has no alien-related skills, so the space-faring skill is added to the list at level 0

> **What about NPCs?**: Players do all the rolling. NPCs do not roll. NPC don't even have stats. If lucky, NPCs may have some abilities to show off how dangerous they are. The players have skills to attack and to defend so they roll it all. If a player hits the target, it's because the target didn't dodge. Likewise, if a player fails to dodge, it's because the enemy hit. Cause and consequence right? The only thing required to define an NPC character is its goals (generally that is eating the players), possible action option (attack, bite, smash, summon inter-dimensional demon of ultimate destruction) and the hoped for difficulty level (how many successes to wear it down). Totally untested difficulty ratings:
Low threat = 1 or 2
Medium threat = 3 or 5
High threat = 6-10
Heroic threat = 10 +

## 2.3) Conflict: Call effect
[back to Table of contents](#table-of-contents)

> Besides deciding on what actions to do, players may also decide to call on an effect. Effects arise when handling failure or as a result of a condition acquired by the player. Calling on an effect generally allows players to make tradeoffs, temporally removing the default effect. For example, consider how you can:
* Accept an instantaneous worsening of the penalty for a chance to ignore it in the future.
* Give up a bonus to provoke a specific effect.
* Take on a different penalty. 

> **Failure handling**: If a character succeeds, them the action is completed as intended. However, there are many ways of failing. The most important thing to keep in mind is that failure should keep the story flowing instead of bringing it to a halt, leaving the players with no options or just delaying the inevitable by allowing infinite re-rolls. Failure handling should assume that given time and resources, the players will not fail unless something happens. From this follows that failure is an opportunity to add complications, twist and new developments to the story that the players need to consider. So, instead of simply failing, the players can call on an alternative failure handling effect. Consider the following failure effects (and try to come up with others!):
1) The action is time-sensitive: Failing allows a limited number of repetitions, gradually increasing the tension with each failure. A tyrant lord is about to execute the hostages, one by one. As infiltrated agents, the players try to convince him that sparing the prisoners would be wiser, because the princess they want to rescue is the fourth hostage in the line of execution. Each failure will result in another slain hostage.
2) The action is interrupted: Failing once prevents the action from being repeated because something else happened, not because the player isn't skilled enough to do it. The player tries to jump over a wagon to get a clean shot at the tyrant lord, however, the wagon's owner shows up and starts to comment the on-going public execution with the player.
3) The action succeeds anyway: Fail forward is an interesting concept that allows the player to succeed even if they fail, but with an added twist or complication. It is similar to having the action interrupted, but it allows for the player to get what he wants. As the player is looking for the incriminating secret papers in the tyrant lord's office, even though the player manages to identify and take them, the paper weight that was on the table is dropped, making a very noticeable noise.
4) Forced success: When a player fails an action, it can be converted to a success by pushing the character to its limits, for example by increasing a level of frustration or getting wounded. This is in fact the common way to solve failing defence actions in combat. When players are hit by a sword waving guard, instead of being wounded, the player automatically calls on a forced success effect and escapes untouched, at the cost of gaining physical strain (trading the permanent penalty for a temporary one!)

> **Narration effects**: To keep thinks more interesting, when a 1 is rolled in any dice, the next player must call a narration but effect, that is, describe the action resolution as normally but add an extra sentence starting with but. This effect attenuates the results of the action, so for a failed roll, the player fails but there was something positive, while for a successful roll there was a consequence unaccounted. The player tries to hide before the guards come into the room. He fails to find a place to hide, but he notices an open window through which he can escape.
The opposite situation would be a call to narration and effect. These are done when the player rolls a double, regardless of the dice values. Similarly, the effect is to provide unexpectedly enhance the action's result, so players' fail then something worse happens, or if the players' succeeds and something better occurs. The player successfully climbs over the wall (and) as he recovers from his back pain.

> **Descriptors**: During the adventure, characters will often experience unexpected conditions, situations and difficulties. Descriptors reflect any unusual effect the character is under, either mechanistically or dramatically, including situational bonuses, conditions penalties or any other effect than is not the default character state. A poisoned character may feel weaker, a paralysed character wouldn't be able to move, while a character with a broken arm may just be able to carry on almost unaffected. Generally, conditions provide a +1 bonus or -1 penalty when calling an action on which their effect can logically be associated. A character with a hidden descriptor will gain a +1 bonus when trying a surprise attack, whereas a weakened character will gain -1 penalty to moving furniture into the new apartment. However, specific descriptors may reflect stronger penalties, effectively preventing certain actions. Being asleep or petrified will prevent moving or taking actions, while a character that is muted or silenced will not be able to talk, and having a broken arm will prevent the character from using two handed weapons. The default effect of a descriptor is defined when the descriptor is acquired, being called by whoever induces it (generally by the GM).
To avoid these default penalties, the player can call on the descriptor effect as well, paying a higher cost now for a chance of improving the effects. 1) A poisoned character receives a -1 penalty for any physical skills. However, the player may call on the poison effect, suggesting that the character suddenly feels a bit dizzy from the conflict effort and takes some time to recover. At the cost of skipping a turn, the poison's default modifier will be ignored the lowest value of a 2d6 roll, reflecting the characters recovered focus after taking some time to rest
2) On the other hand, a player may call on the sleeping effect to wake up a character immediately, but having a -1 sleepy or unprepared penalty equal to the highest value of a 2d6 roll.
3) Finally, a character with optimal positioning may give up his +1 bonus for an extra or stronger attack, inducing extra strain on the enemy or maybe cause a disarmed or panic condition to his enemy.
Again, players should feel free to call on custom effect and add new and unique takes on their descriptors.

> **Wounds and Frustration**: Even though conflict is not deadly, wounds can occur. In addition, the constant struggle can put a lot of mental pressure on the characters. As mentioned before, strain is a "forced success" failure handling tradeoff, where permanent wounds are avoided by placing additional (temporary) strain on the characters. However, this tradeoff is not without its drawbacks (otherwise it would be just a trade with no "off"). Wounds and frustration still occur as a side-effects of accumulated strain so, at the end of each conflict as the characters rest and all their strain is removed, there is a chance that a character was wounded either directly by an enemy or indirectly by the strain placed on his body (muscle injury from a bad swing). To determine if a character received a physical or mental wound, roll 2d6 and, if the the lowest dice value is equal or less than the strain accumulated during that conflict, the character was wounded in combat or became stressed from a difficult social interaction by that amount. Notice that “Obverse-based conflicts” are often simple and can be handled with without incurring strain penalties. If that is not the case, these conflicts can work both ways, either the player gets frustrated because we can’t track the bandits or he trips and falls as he tries to follow their tracks.
Physical and mental (stress/frustration) wounds have a maximum of 10 levels, at which point the character is exhausted from accumulated wounds or loses his mind completely, becoming unplayable. By having more than 5 levels of wounds, the player risks permanent damage in the form of a new descriptor. If the sum of the wound roll is below the level of the wound, then a new wound description is gained for physical wounds or the frustration trait kicks in for the mental wounds. 

3) Further options
------------------
[back to Table of contents](#table-of-contents)

>**Helping**: The success rates in this system are expected to be very low, so helping each other should be a common strategy for solving conflicts. Helping would seem intuitive in cases like combat: Everyone smash the goblin until the goblin hurts! In such a case, even though every success contributes to the common goal, the probability of success of any individual attempt is unchanged. The player's may attempt to directly change the chances of success by actively helping another player. Helping takes advantage of the unstructured "turn-based" flow of the system and considers the different types of conflict previously described:

* For simple conflicts that require a single skill check to succeed (like picking a lock), if the acting player fails an action, the next player is allowed to use his action to help by simply calling the same skill. If successful, the helping player modifier is added to the acting player success range and the result re-evaluated. As the first player is struggling with the lock, the second one approaches and, after careful inspection recognizes the mechanism, guiding the first one as he successfully picks the lock and opens the door.
* In a structured conflict that requires successive checks (like combat), players can try to out-manoeuver the adversary, forcing them into a disadvantageous position, providing a +1 bonus for the next players. The player distracts a goblin, allowing another one to approach undetected.
* In other complex conflicts requiring completing multiple sub-tasks (like deciphering an ancient book), because the characters have time to exchange information and help each other interpreting new findings and brainstorm solutions, all character benefit from each other's help. Every success on any skill will provide a +1 bonus for all the following tasks. The players read different passages of the ancient scrolls, struggling to understand their meaning. At last, one uncovers a pattern within the text. Sharing this finding with the others, they continue studying the scrolls now knowing some of the patterns of the text.
Note that helping is not without a cost as, even if the action is successful, both players used up their turns to solve it. Likewise, if it fails, both players will suffer the consequences (If a player fails to help disarm a trap, both of them are affected, instead of just one). It is worth reminding that any other failure handling method can be considered, but the call failure effect must be the same for all players involved, be it gaining frustration levels, acquiring a descriptor or being spotted by the evil entity lurking nearby.

>**Healing**: So far, there are four types of damage characters are subjected to: temporary strain, permanent wounds, cumulative stress and descriptors.
* Strain is recovered completely as soon as the characters leave a conflict and assuming they can rest for a little while before moving into the next conflict.
* Frustration heals when the players are back to safety and have time to get a proper meal, drink and rest. For each relaxing moment the character has, its frustration is decreased by the lowest value on a 2d6 roll.
* Minor wounds (wound level up to 5) require simple treatment that can be provided by anyone, reducing the wound level by the difference between the lowest value on a 2d6 roll.
* Major wounds (wound level above 5) require trained medical treatment and access to adequate medical supplies. Proper medical care will reduce wounds by the highest value on a 2d6 roll.
* Descriptors do not heal by themselves and generally require a double roll (narration and effect) to be removed or adequate treatment to be obtained. Some physical wounds cannot be completely removed.

>**Movement**:In this system, there are no grids, maps or any other sort of objective locations and positions during conflicts. The general layout is described, highlighting particularities that could be used for or against the players and all characters involved will start in relative positions to each other. Each character can be close, nearby, in range or out of range to any other character:
* Close enemies can be attacked normally with melee weapons, but with a -1 penalty for ranged weapons and magic. If hit once,
ranged attackers will be forced into a defensive position and see their attack disrupted.
* Nearby enemies can be attacked with melee weapons (after moving), long reach weapons, ranged weapons and magic.
* In range enemies can be attacked with ranged weapons and magic.
* Out of range enemies can be attacked only with higher level magic.
Positions are not linear, but exponentially spread. The character occupies the close space and need to move 1 "spaces" to a nearby position, 2 "spaces" to get to an in range target or 4 "spaces" to reach an out of reach target. 

> **Basic actions**: The player is free to come up with any action he wants, from I lower my club on the goblin's head to spin elegantly over the assassin's back and throw a dagger at his back as a fall on one knee. Actions are free-form and if the player comes up with an idea, that should be implemented within reason. Conflict has no clear initiative or turn order and everyone acts "simultaneously".
Each character can only take a "2 actions per turn", plus one free move, regardless of what these actions are. By default, it is assumed that the character makes one move followed by simultaneous attack and defence actions. As such, during a "default turn", each player will roll 4d6, 2d6 for attacking and 2d6 for defending. Some examples of default actions are defined as follows:
* Move action: cover 1 "space" of movement
* Attack action: actively attempt to cause damage to a target (either with sword or word!) by calling a valid weapon-type action (skill check)
* Defence action: protect from and adversary's attack by calling a valid defence-type action (skill check)
* Manoeuver action: Players may try to impose a disadvantage on a target (gain +1 bonus or a descriptor)
* Interact action: Players may wish to interact with items, be it picking them from the floor or from a bag, reloading a weapon or drinking a potion or calling an action note covered by the other actions.
* Reload action: Players may reload their ranged weapons before attacking.
* Hide action: Players may attempt remaining hidden from the adversaries.
* Recover action: the player may need to stand up or recover from a previous attack or may simply wish to fall back to overview the battle field or catch some breath, removing 1 strain penalty accumulated from the conflict.
Once again, players should feel free to define new actions to fit their needs.

> **Stances**: Given that the "default turn" is fairly restrictive and simply replacing one action for another does not provide many strategic options, it could be interesting to generate options by defining stances. Stances reflect how the character is currently approaching conflict. Different character may focus on different parts of a conflict, some are more careful, some more impulsive, others more calculating. Based on the intended approach, the player can call a stance effect, replacing the default actions to fit their stance, gambling actions for additional bonus or shifting bonus and penalties to improve a specific action and the cost of another. Some examples of stances the characters may take are:
* Aggressive stance: The character will focus on attacking the target, ignoring the defence and becoming more exposed
Modifiers: +1 bonus to attack, -1 penalty to defence
Fail: Take a defence action as normal
Success: You can give up the defence action for a second attack action with no bonus.
Bonus: On a second hit, the target loses the attack action (being forced into a defensive stance), otherwise the player is exposed to counter.
* Defensive stance: The character will prioritize his defence, trying to stand his ground above all.
Modifiers: +1 bonus to defence, -1 penalty to attack
Fail: You counter attack as normal.
Success:You can give up the attack action for a second defence action with no bonus.
Bonus: On a second defence, counter second target "with shield" (or other plausible method) calling an out-manoeuvre effect.
* Manoeuvring stance: The character will try to out-manoeuvre the target (feinting, move to a better position, etc.)
Modifiers: no change
Fail: Attack with a -1 penalty.
Success: The target gets an out-manoeuvred descriptor (call effect for +1 bonus) for 1 turn and you can give up attack for another manoeuvre
Bonus: On a second success, impose another suitable descriptor (disarm, prone, taunted, confused, grappled).
* Ranged stance: The character will focus on reloading his ranged weapon, being more exposed to attacks.
Modifiers: +1 bonus to ranged attack, -1 to defence
Fail: You can't fail reloading, can you?
Success: You are allowed to make a ranged attack
Bonus: You attack from far away
* Stealthy stance: The character will prioritize staying out of sight.
Modifiers: +1 bonus to sneaky skills, -1 penalty to defence
Fail: The character is caught surprised and forced to defend
Success: The character is hidden can attack with +1 bonus.
Bonus: On a successful attack, you remain hidden.
* Recovery stance: The character will fall back and take a breath before joining the battle again.
Modifiers: +1 bonus to defence, -1 penalty to all else
Fail: If you fail your defence, you can't recover
Success: You get away from the battle and will not be attacked
Bonus: You recover from 1 strain penalty
* Casting stance: The character focus on spell casting by first gathering the arcane energies required
Modifiers: +1 bonus to magic, -1 penalty to defence
Fail: Your the arcane energies you gathered dissipate.
Success: You are allowed to make a ranged attack, you can give up your defense action to avoid casting strain
Bonus: Take 1 less casting strain from your multicasting
* Anti-magic stance: The character focus the attention on disrupting other casters, which requires concentration.
Modifiers: +1 to disrupt magic, -1 penalty to defence
Fail: You must physically defend from the spell
Success: You block the magic completely and can give up your attack to cast the back the spell with -1 penalty of the corresponding spell skill
Bonus: On a hit, the enemy spell caster will not be able to cast next turn
Once again, players should feel free to define new actions to fit their needs.

> **Magic (area/shape skills)**: 
In principle, magic is just a skill like any other skill, so you use it as you'd use your sword skill. One difference is that, a spell can be shaped and increase the area of effect, while that would be difficult to do that with a sword. As such, the skill level determines how many targets a spell can have, which will also define the possible shapes of a spell. Before casting a spell, you must decide on the power of the spell. The spell power is the number of targets the spell will have, with the possibility of repeating the same target. For each new target the spell skill level is reduced by 1, which means that more powerful spells are more difficult to cast. A player decides to cast a fire spell, which is a level 3 skill. The player decides to use the maximum spell power. Because the minimum level is 0, the fire skill can only be reduced 3 times, meaning that the maximum number of targets is 3. However, the player decides that the spell is focused around on particular enemy, which will be targeted twice (or once with higher power) and use the "leftover" target on another nearby enemy. The fire spell is then muli-casted 3 times at level 0. Once the spell power is chosen, the next choice is the shape of the spell, which it will determine the possible targets and how one can defend from it. A line spell can hit targets in "different zone" and will be dodgeable, while splash spell will hit all target in one or "two zones" and will only be blockable. Increasing the spell power, not only makes it more difficult to cast, it also puts extra strain on the caster. For each roll (target), if the lowest dice value is below the number of targets considered, add 1 casting strain. Casting strain applies only to the specific magic skill used and restores 1 per turn where the character does not cast a spell. If you multi-cast a fire spells with four targets, then for each of the 4 rolls, take the lowest value. The number of dice values below 4 is the casting-strain applied specifically to fire spells, all other spells being unaffected. Be careful as casting strain is a mental effort, so the strain left for each individual magic skill will be individually converted to frustration at the end of the conflict. Abusing magic powers is a quick way to insanity!
Note that magic is the only way to target out-of-range, so this comes at a cost. Targeting someone that far away adds additional strain on the caster, so each out-of-range target counts as two targets (that is, requires one lower level roll).There are two particularities about spells: one is that, unlike weapons, it is something you may want to target yourself. The other is that not all spells are created equally. So in the first case, if you are targeting someone willing to take the spell effect, there is no way you can fail! This type of casting should be treated as a regular skill check and dealt with the same failure handling methods as other simple conflicts, with forcing the success at the cost of frustration being particularly a suitable solution. The second issue includes magical effects such as mind control, reflect magic, long lasting spells and other unbalanced spells. The complication about these spells is that they are, in fact, complex conflicts. Let's consider mind manipulation and say that a player wants to enslave the bartender, so he has free beer. Complete mind control is such a strong effect that no single casting can do it. It requires the building up of magical effects to reach such a powerful effect. For example:
* The player can use his "mind magic" skill and the first success simply makes the barkeeper pay attention to the character.
* The second check is a non-magical check for "personality skill" to pass the a first chit-chat encounter and become friendly with the bartender.
* The third check could be another magic check to reinforce the friendship feelings towards the player.
* The fourth check may require some sort of non-magical plea for the barkeeper's help, confirming that he would be on the characters' side.
* Given his readiness to help, a fifth magical check can settle the bartender bias in favour of the player.
And so on, slowly working the barkeeper until he is irresistibly and unquestionably following the player's orders. Note how the magical effects are mostly statementing and reinforcing the underlying feelings already present. This can be worked over days or months, going back and forwards as spells and social interactions skills will alternatively fail and succeed.

4) Character progression
------------------------
[back to Table of contents](#table-of-contents)

> In this system, characters do not level up or gain quanta of power at certain points in a deterministic way. They age and gain experience as one does! Characters can progress, or improve, in 3 different ways: gain experience with skills, acquire better equipment and learn new abilities.

>**Skill experience**: Because of the skills’ dynamics and flexibility, a “learn by doing” levelling system is very suitable. The main idea is that, by using a specific skill the character may gain experience with it as he explores and finds out new ways of doing it or simply gains deeper understanding of how it is done. However, this doesn't happen all the time. Just because you keep breaking eggs, it doesn't mean you gain greater insights about this task. Sometimes, something happens, a piece of shell got into the egg white, and you wonder if there is a better way. And only some of those times, you find there is and actually start doing it better. This concept is reflected in the game by the 3 checks/rules for levelling up skills:
1) Observe something: Every time you use a skill (roll a 2d6 by calling an action) there is a chance that something happens or you notice something new about that skill. For example, the more you slash goblins, the more likely it is for you to notice new slashing angles to improve your... slashing. You notice something different when you roll a 6 on any dice, regardless of the actual result, so you can learn both by failing and by succeeding!
2) Learn something: However, noticing that a given goblin slashed particularly well is not enough. You may wonder why that was, and if different parts of a goblin have different "slashing efficiencies", but only sometimes will you understand why that goblin slashed so easily. Given that you notice something different (rolled a 6), your observation may lead to a meaningful insight (re-roll/explode the 6 die). If the new roll is above your next skill level, you gain experience on that skill, as learn something about the action that is above your skill.
3) Improve skill: Gaining experience in a certain skill, means that you have a better idea of how it works, but even though picking up the basics is probably fast, mastering a skill requires years of accumulated experience, continuously noticing small details and trying new methods. So you only level up your skill by accumulating enough experience to develop some sort of practical improvement in the way to use your skill.The amount of accumulated experience needed to level up a skill is equal to the value of the next level of the skill. Once you have accumulated that much experience, your skill levels up and your probability of success goes up!In summary:
1) Every time you roll a 2d6, re-roll any 6s and if the new value is above the called skill level+1 (next level), you gain experience.
2) Once your experience value surpasses the value of your skill level+1 (next level), that skill levels up
*Accumulated experience per skill level:*
For level 1: 1XP (+1)
For level 2: 3XP (+2)
For level 3: 6XP (+3)
For level 4: 10XP (+4)
For level 5: 15XP (+5)

> **Equipment**: As skills, equipment is free-form and can be defined on the fly. To create a new piece of equipment or item, simply name it by defining it by adding an adjective to the base name: Rusting Sword, Long Rope, Fast Horse, Long-ranged Rifle, Heavy Armour, Amazing Laser Blaster. To that, a small extra descriptor may be added if the equipment has any distinctive feature or power (compare useless robes with useless robes of might). Of course, super cool and legendary items can have names that are a reference to some historical or mythical place, event or person, and players could use these as opportunities for flashback chapters or as part of their character arcs.
Since the skill level is naturally capped at 5 by the way the system works, and that is still not a great success probability, equipment is a way to further improve the character. This can be done in 3 main ways:
1) Apply a bonus to a skill or, more rarely, attribute: There aren't really much more stats that can be affected by equipment. Equipment that provides bonus will be noted as +1/X (the casual penalty as -1/X), where +1 is the provided bonus (-1 the penalty) and X the maximum level obtainable with equipment. A cheap stick is +1/1, meaning that players get a +1 bonus on their stick (spear maybe?) skill as long as this bonus does not result in a modifier greater than of 1, so the equipment has no effect for players with stick skill at level 1. Likewise, a Balanced sword could be +1/3, which provided a bonus for players below sword level 3. This means that you may be too skilful to actually gain any bonus from your equipment.
2) The item has a descriptor which can be called: This allows for more general powers or effects to be imbued in the equipment. A poisoned dagger has poison descriptor, which can be called 3 times to induce poison on a target. A scroll of thunder has a thunder spell descriptor that can be called to use the thunder spell at the specified level. A helmet of speed has the fast descriptor, which is called to add another action to the player's turn. A hammer has the stun effect, which can be called to hit harder when out-manoeuvring an enemy Using descriptors allows for more flexibility in equipment creation.
3) Really powerful items may allow automatic fails to succeed: Note that since success is defined by a 5+ range, then rolling 2,3 or 4 automatically fails. However, certain items may allow skills to succeed by using a 4+ range instead. Some examples of items the characters may encounter are:
* Weapons: Weapons can increase the associated skill level with a +1 bonus, allow attacking up to a certain range, impose a disadvantages such as requiring re-loading or any other custom effect (stun, prone, immobilise).
* Protective gear: Armour, shields and other equipment used for protection can be used to prevent damage. This can be by adding a +1 bonus to defensive skills (dodge, block, be brutally smashed), providing guaranteed success descriptors (once per turn your heavy armour can be use to block an attack), immunity or resistance to certain types of damage or even adding an extra strain buffer!.
* Other gear: These are smaller items such as necklaces, rings and charms, which are unlikely to be related to any particular skill. These items may have setting specific functions, such as being required to cast spells: A level 3 water magic caster may not be able to cast any spells if her create water ring is not equipped (basically a generalization of the spell book concept). These items can provide other benefits such changing attribute values (ring of rudeness: -1 Social), modify specific skill bonus (sword rune: +1 sword skill), or any type of descriptor with effects such as automatic successes (mantle of rose scent: you automatically convince blind creatures you're a talking rose), magic immunity or any other effects.
* Consumables: Item such as potions and scrolls that are consumed upon use provide immediate rewards, such as healing wounds, removing strain, gaining bonuses or access to certain skills. Some items should be just what they say on the label (antidote, potion of strength, love potion, scroll of toad shape)
* Other: Any item can be relevant without changing the character stats or adding any magical descriptor. Walkie-talkies can have their mundane function and simply allow easier communication, where easier communication can then be used to set up ambushes.

> **Abilities**: The characters are not limited to their initial abilities (racial, cultural and personal). As the adventure continues, they can acquire further abilities. The main way to do so, st to level up skills. Upon reaching level 3 in a skill, the player is allowed to choose a skill ability, illustrating a new technique the character learned by gaining experience in that particular skill. These skills start at level 3 as risky tradeoffs (Sword Dance: When using a sword, gain +1 bonus in dodging, but the defence action fails, you lose your balance and get -1 penalty on every action next turn). At level 4, the ability bonuses are increased (If the target is hit, additionally prevent him from attacking) and at level 5, the skill is mastered and the penalty is removed.
Another way to gain abilities is through plot rewards, particularly from character-specific plots. In these cases, the character will simply learn a new personal skill that is associated with how the player has defined and played the character. The method for levelling skills may lead to super efficient characters at the end of a long-term game, with all relevant skills maxed out. Additional complexity may be introduced with tree-type skill progression, that skill, skills that depend on other skills. This basically means that the skills abilities become no the more than access to new skills (acquisition of new training attributes).
This issue is well illustrated by magical skills. Let's consider fire bolt, fire ball and fire storm. It is clear that there is a difference in power between these. The system, even though allowing to tune the power and shape of spells, may not capture these spells completely. As such, it could be thought that the skill ability gained at fire bolt level 3 is fire ball, whereas the skill ability for level 3 fire ball is fire storm. This way, it is possible to generate a hierarchy of magical spells, increasing the existing number of the fire spell skill and ensuring consistency in magical power growth.

> **Training**: Availability of training is setting specific, but paying for (or being rewarded) training or to study some particular skill may be something relevant, especially at low levels. Simple practice, instead of training may also be appropriate in these cases. Access to low level skill training (up to level 3) should be common, but it should be difficult to find someone skilled enough to provide high-level skill training. Long term training may be possible for training attributes (such as magic and heavy armour), where one character may be taught the principles of spell-casting and become trained in the arcane arts. However, training a main attribute is a lifetime job, so that is unlikely to be available without a very structured routine lasting years. Finally, new racial or cultural abilities may be learned, as the character may join specific schools or learn from other masters that teach a different aspect of one's heritage or a different interpretation, approach or philosophy within one's culture. All trained abilities should follow the "3-level progression" suggested for skill abilities, illustrating the character's progress in mastering a new skill.

5) Character story arc
----------------------
[back to Table of contents](#table-of-contents)

> Players are allowed to contribute to the story in different ways, not just by deciding what their characters are doing.

> **What do you see?**: After introducing any new scene, place or situation, the players should be asked what they see: Do you spot someone in the corner table? Is there something strange in the wall? Are all the books arranged strangely? Players should have the opportunity to contribute with interesting details in every scene, if nothing else just to add new descriptions to bring out different things about the places they visit.

> **You did what?**: As mentioned before, it is down to the next player to evaluate the results of the previous player's actions. As such, every player will have the opportunity to handle both success and failures, determining their consequences. However, remember that the NPC actions are narrated at the beginning of a turn, so that is generally done by the scene owner.

> **Play your cards!**: Literally, there will be cards! Each player picks 3 cards at the start of the game. Each player will then be able to add rumours, hints and clues to the story, trying to drive players into their secret story arc. Once players take the bait, they play one card and discard the other 2, starting a player owned scene (that is, that player becomes the GM). The player can then move the character secret story arc forward, that is, players will GM their own character's arc! Whenever a new player takes over, the previous scene owner picks 3 new cardsCard suits: Each suit reflects a different type of quest or game-play. Hearts are for socializers, so these should include a relevant amount of interaction with NPCs (chatty enemies, distressed peasants, negotiating passage). Diamonds are for achievers, so these include or point to some clear reward or something the players can achieve or collect (rare equipment sets, money, status). Spades are for explorers, so these should introduce new lands, explain long lost secrets or clarify some historical event or any other discovery (background information, a rumours of distant lands, a secret revealed by an solving a puzzle). Finally, clubs are for killers, so these quests should should be filled with combat and fights (challenges of power, all out combat, arenas)

Card values: The numeric values of the cards illustrate the number of story conflicts the player can call on. These can be saved and accumulated, but are earned only when playing the card. So cards with higher values will allow for longer-lasting or more complex missions. Royals will represent important named enemies (possibly recurring). A Joker is a quest that has a change to gain a bless or new ability and in some way provide a significant improvement (being knighted by the king could be as important as a new ability!) while Aces represent conflicts leading to new friendly or helpful connection.
