---
layout: none
---

# SRD

## Descriptors  
Descriptors are small, clear sentences that define someone or something. Unsurprisingly, adding descriptor together is what allows anything in the game to be described, including how characters relate to other characters and how they differ from each other. An important feature of this system is that, given the free-form nature of descriptors, these can be generated on the fly as required. Taken to the extreme, this could mean that no character creation is required to start a game! 

Descriptors are combinations of <span style="color:green">characteristics</span>. Making any type of descriptor only requires an idea of what it is describing and then determine the combination of characteristics that matches it best. These specific combinations can be grouped into descriptor subgroups to help organise and generate a character and run a game. These base descriptor characteristics are:  
 
### Descriptor Effects   
<span style="color:green">Effects</span> describe interactions between descriptors, allow or prevent certain actions or even define particular roleplaying guidelines.  Descriptors with effects that are not expected to change reflect stable, long-term characteristics of a character or object. As such, these can be thought of a subgroup: <span style="color:green">traits</span>. This way, traits may include what is commonly thought of as ability scores, race, class, job or training. It additionally includes any physical and mental characteristics, personality, flaws, strengths, fears, background and even culture. Generally, they should describe defining features that distinguish the character or object.

### Descriptor Counter   
<span style="color:green">Counters</span> are used to measure or count, keeping track of relevant numbers associated with the descriptor. The simplest example of such descriptors would be the subgroup <span style="color:green">resistances</span>. In the case of these descriptions, the counter can be interpreted as accumulated damage. Many facets of the character’s resistances can be captured the creation of appropriate resistances.  However, damage is not the only thing that can be counted. Amongst others, <span style="color:green">attitudes</span> or <span style="color:green">reputations</span> are examples of measurable descriptors that can be relevant. In these cases, the counter may be thought beyond the damage concept, instead reflecting as accumulated social standing or reputation. 

#### Recovery  
Any descriptors having a counter can accumulate damage and so, may be allowed to recover. However, note that not all of these descriptors may recover naturally. As such, the way these descriptors recover damage will vary with the nature of the descriptor, as recovering from mental stress is different than recovering from battle wounds. Most often than not, recovery is associated with either rest (healing in a safe and quiet place for some time) or a specific task (such as finding proof of a set up to recover one’s reputation).

One important consideration in relation to rest is that it must be a limited resource at the players disposal. So, during each rest (or day), the players may be allowed to take only so many recovery actions. These actions may include:
* Relaxing: Healing may be automatic. 
* Consume: Healing may require the consumption of items. 
* Check: Healing may require an action and thus a check by one character. In these cases, using skills with appropriate items and in the appropriate conditions upgrades the effect. 

#### Wounds   
The limitation of rest actions is important because, if accumulated damage is not properly healed, it may become greater than the resistance level. If that happens, the character gains a related (minor) <span style="color:green"> wound</span> that provides a constant penalty for appropriate actions equal to its level. If the wound level is greater than the resistance tier, then the character is incapacitated and gains a (major) wound trait. However, gaining a wound immediately restores all accumulated damage and the resistance level considered becomes that of the tier equal to the current wound level. Minor wounds require simple treatment that can be provided by anyone, but major wounds require trained medical treatment, access to adequate medical supplies and long resting as these are considerable handicaps, such as broken limbs, deep burns, major confusion or memory loss. 

#### Conditions  
Associated with damage and wounds, some special items, abilities or critical hits may cause specific effects. These temporary effects can be considered the <span style="color:green"> conditions </span>subgroup of descriptors (in which wounds may be included!). These descriptors are a varied group that includes diseases, magic effects, character conscious states, moving restrictions or any other conditions that can be gained and lost easily. Because these descriptors are temporary, it is important to consider how they may be removed *(naturally, with an action, consuming an appropriate item, through magic, etc.)* On the other hand, some of these descriptors may lead to long lasting or permanent effects if untreated for too long, so defining  a worsening condition may be important.

### Descriptor Level  
* <span style="color:green">Levels </span> describe the proficiency of the character for a given action. This means that it determines the success chances of a character successfully doing something. If there is a chance of success, then it means descriptors with levels are those which effects are uncertain and may fail. *<span style="color:grey">A warrior may be trying to pacify a nervous horse to build up his reputation with the clan nobles. Even though the warrior is highly trained in handling horses, he may still not succeed in this particular case, even though the result of this action will depend on the past experiences and training of the warrior. </span>* Given that a descriptor level correlates with a character’s experience, it may be important that these descriptors can be improved. Descriptors with levels that can also be improved can defined the subgroup of  <span style="color:green">skills</span>. As such, skills represent the general adventuring actions a character may attempt to do, that is, every regular action that can fail and be improved, including attack, defence and magic actions! *

Levels only describe the chances of using a descriptor successfully. However, the same skill can be used differently by different characters. This means that, even though two characters may be using the same skill with the same chances of success, one may still be trying to use a more powerful technique or method than the other. To distinguish different methods and approaches, <span style="color:green">tiers</span> of descriptor powers can be associated with their levels, where each tier represents a noticeable increase in the descriptor's power. 


#### Success Range  
The system resolutions methods depend on characteristics available for a given descriptor, so that these methods may not be callable by all descriptors. <span style="color:green">Success range</span> is the method used when an action’s result is of uncertain. As such, success ranges are called to resolve situations where descriptors with level characteristic are used. This method takes into account both the character’s descriptors and the challenge itself, integrating all the values that modify the chances of a given action’s success, that is all <span style="color:green">modifiers</span>, into a range of values to which the sum of a 2d6 is compared to. If this sum is within the success range, then the action succeeds as intended. However, if the sum falls outside the action fails or is somehow incomplete. 

To estimate the success range, thus the probability an action will succeed, it is important to keep in mind the base value of 5, which is the default value at which an untrained character succeeds an action. As such, the base success range is 5-5 *(including the extremes)*. The upper value of this range can be extended by the character’s <span style="color:green">proficiency</span> *(hence the name 5+)*, where the character proficiency is the sum of all bonuses and penalties the character’s descriptors provide. In general, these are the skill or resistance level modified by the trait or condition effects and accumulated damage: 
  
1. Choose any appropriate descriptor, such as a skill for an active action or a resistance for a passive, instinctive action. Subtract the damage *(if available)* from the level. 
2. To that value, add all trait and condition bonuses and penalties to determine the final proficiency.
3. In addition, <span style="color:green">challenge difficulty</span> may provide quick a +1 bonus or -1 penalty adjustments to proficiency.
4. Add the proficiency to 5 to determine the upper bound of the success range.

For longer running games, the lower value of the range may also be modified. Each challenge will have a <span style="color:green">rank</span>, reflecting the relative difference between the character's technique and power *(tier)* and that required to overcome the challenge. These modifiers are also added to 5 to determine the success range lower bound. Unless there is a significant difference in difficulty, most challenges’ rank will be 0, meaning that the lower bound of the success range will be 5 except in rare situations. 

*Note* that, if the upper bound is below the lower bound, the range is invalid, and the character is not capable of succeeding no matter what. This means that, due to incompetence, natural toughness or magical means, the target of the action being effectively immune to the approach taken. 

___

If the resulting sum of the 2d6 is within the success range, then the action’s result is as intended. However, if the result is outside this range, the action doesn’t have to simply fail. The most important thing to keep in mind is that failure should keep the story flowing instead of bringing it to a halt. As such, failure handling should assume that, unless something happens, given time and resources, characters would eventually complete the tasks they are familiar with. From this it follows that, regardless of the original result, players should not repeat the same the exact action for the same exact purpose, unless there was a relevant change in the challenged conditions. If an action could be repeated until a success occurs, then such an action should be considered an auto-success as it will have no impact in the narrative (the player would jump the wall eventually!).  

The lack of repetition forces the players to explain why the action is not possible as well as promoting thinking of other ways of overcoming the same obstacle. As such, failure is an opportunity to add complications, twists and new developments to the story that the players need to consider:

* For simple challenges, the action may be interrupted instead of failing, preventing the action from being repeated (a guard shows up, the lock breaks, etc.) The action fails not because the character isn’t proficient enough to do it, but because something happened while he was attempting it.
* If the challenge involves information, failure can result in partial recalling, confusing news, gathering rumours or even misleading or misinformation. 
*   For more complex challenges, failure may instead result in a reduced effect instead of a full effect. For example, each value away from the success range, damage is reduced by 1. Likewise, less information can be discovered, deciphered or recovered from documents or investigations.
*   On the other hand, if the resulting “reduced” effect is negative, the action could fail with a negative effect such as accumulation of frustration resistance counter.

___

If multiple players try the same action simultaneously, one may receive help from the others when the situation logically allows it. In such cases, any action from another character that can logically influence the outcome of a given character’s action, may allow a +1 help bonus to be used to tip the scales in favour of success, effectively extending both character’s success range. 

Besides helping with a single action, it is possible for characters to help each other using different actions. On such cases, the help action needs to succeed to provide the help bonus. Within this case, it may also be possible for a character to help all other characters in their various actions simultaneously, instead of focusing on the action of a single character. In such case, all other characters will gain the help bonus from one single action, however, the action will suffer from a -1 manoeuvre penalty. 


#### Improvement  
In addition to representing actions that can fail, descriptors having a level characteristic also represent actions that can be improved. This means that, besides having an associated success range and action resolution mechanism, they must also have a levelling mechanism. In the 5+ system, characters do not level up or gain power at certain points in a deterministic way. They age and gain experience, meaning that they must use descriptors (such as skills) to improve through trial and error. As such, each time a descriptor is used, there is a small change that the character notices or learns something useful, improving his chances from then on. 

When using an action and rolling 2d6 as part of the action resolution, if the same number is rolled on both dice (roll a double) then the character notices something interesting, regardless of success or failure. If the double is at least the current descriptor level plus tier value, the character learns from the action, immediately improving it by gaining a level to the descriptor used. Otherwise, the player may mark the descriptor to know the character found something interesting about it. 

During each resting time, the player may choose to take time (a rest action) to practice. Because focusing the practice on one skill requires others to be left aside, for each practice the player chooses two marked descriptors and removes theses markings and then attempts a free 2d6 roll to level up one of the two chosen descriptors. 

___

As the characters improve their descriptors and becomes more proficient at certain actions, they may also learn new ways of doing these actions, being that new methods, more powerful techniques or simply learning how to use more advanced tools. These technical improvements are reflected by the descriptor tier value, which groups levels of proficiency and is mostly important to accommodate for long running games. If a character levels up a descriptor with a double 6, it also unlocks a new tier. However, characters can only have one base tier not fully leveled up, so if a second double 6 is rolled, the same tier above will level up. Only once the base tier is fully levelled up, will the base tier change. 

Consistent with the increase of power, mastery of a new technique or even just the development of a new approach, unlocking higher tiers of a descriptor may optionally unlock abilities *(another example of descriptor subgroup)*. Abilities are special actions that character can use by pushing themselves a little further to impose additional effects on their target. Abilities are general effects and can be used for any descriptor that has a level characteristic, such as adding a fear condition with a successful intimidation attempt, being able to find extra clues in an investigation or easily noticing ambushes. Because abilities represent an additional effort than the underlying regular action, theses descriptors have a cost such as fatigue resistance damage, limiting the amount of times these actions can be used.  

Special values like 1 or 6 may be considered when defining the effects of some descriptors such as conditions and abilities *([see below](#abilities))*. In such cases, rolling a 1 can be seen as a bad outcome and rolling a 6 a good outcome.

___

Besides improving the character’s own proficiency and power by improving descriptors, characters may also improve by acquiring more powerful <span style="color:green">equipment</span>. Equipment can be considered as a sub-group of descriptors, describing those effects associated with a particular item. As such, equipment is free form and can be defined on the fly. In this way, equipment is a very flexible way to promote character progression as it can be used to influence any of the character’s own descriptors. Because equipment is free-form, the number of possible effects combinations makes its uses almost unlimited. However, there are a number of basic options that can be considered:

* Items can restrict access to certain descriptors (skills or abilities)

* Items of higher or lower quality (or items that are blessed or cursed), may provide bonuses or penalties to a descriptor or action

* Items may be used to protect the characters

* Magical or other specific items allow for more general powers or effects to be imbued in the equipment

### Challenges
A game using the 5+ framework is structured as a sequence of actions the players have their characters attempting. This way, each player needs to constantly answer the question *“What would my character do now?”* to determine the actions their character will take. A <span style="color:green">turn</span> is a round of players’ actions, where each player narrates the character’s actions. In such a way, turns work as a way to give all players equal opportunity to act, including skipping the turn if so they wish. However, there is no intrinsic order within a turn, with all actions on the same turn being considered *as simultaneous as possible*. This means that the order players act doesn’t have to match the actual order of character actions, being perfectly possible for a player to act after a player and decide to have the character act before the other player’s character. 

A turn starts with a <span style="color:green">description of the situation</span> and a quick definition of what each NPC will be doing in the next instants after which each <span style="color:green">player describes the actions</span> their character will do. Actions are free-form and if the player comes up with an idea, that should be implemented within reason. If an action requires a non-existent descriptor, it can easily be created on the fly by considering the character's concept and determining the reasonable proficiency. Once the actions of all involved parties are determined, <span style="color:green">all actions with uncertain results must be resolved</span>  by comparing the sum of a 2d6 and the appropriate success range, including those checks requested as a consequence of non-player characters’ (NPCs) actions.  When the actions are resolved and all double rolls for descriptor improvements are accounted for, a new turn starts.  

___

Some of the actions attempted by a character can just be roleplayed either because there are simple enough to always succeed or because they are impossible to the point of always failing. However, if the outcome of the action is uncertain, either because the character is being actively opposed by someone or something or because it is attempting a difficult non-routine action, a <span style="color:green">challenge</span>  situation may arise. Each challenge has an objective, or a list of goals, that need to be achieved before it can be overcome. 

Challenges are defined by the ending conditions as well as the opposition. The <span style="color:green">winning condition</span> is the total amount of successes the players need to collectively accumulate to overcome the challenge. For simple tasks, the winning condition is simply succeeding a descriptor check *(that is, accumulating 1 success)*. However, more complex challenges, such as investigations, elections or even maybe disarming a particularly complex trap, will require more accumulated successes to be overcome. Even though nothing prevents these challenges from being solved with a single roll, playing through them slowly may focus the game on a particularly intense challenge, providing intensity and variety at the expense of taking longer. This will additionally attenuate the effect of randomness in the outcome by diluting the impact of any single roll and control the difficulty of the challenge, while providing more cinematic scenes by adding twists and turns until the final outcome is decided. 

If the players are not allowed to fail the challenge, then they will continue to accumulate successes until eventually enough successes are accumulated (see failure handling [above](#failure-handling)). To ensure the challenge is real, <span style="color:green">losing conditions</span> may be considered for each challenge. A common loosing condition is damage accumulation to one resistance, where characters become incapable of continuing their efforts. There are potentially as many losing conditions as challenges, since each challenge may be lost differently. Common losing conditions to include: 

* Time sensitive challenges: the players have only so many turns to overcome the challenge. 
* Failure tolerance: the player can fail only so many times. 
* Arm-wresting: The characters are opposed by someone in a back and forth challenge and need to avoid hitting the point of no return.    

___

The number of accumulated successes for any action is defined by the same 2d6 roll used to determine if the action succeeds. The default number of successes obtained for a single check is the lowest value rolled on both dice. This value may be ignored (immunity), downgraded to 1 (resistance), or upgraded to the highest value rolled (weakness) depending on the task and target themselves. However, descriptors can provide modifiers and change the number of successes a character obtains for any given action.   

___

Besides the winning and losing conditions, challenges may have a clear <span style="color:green"> opposition </span> force. This can be as simple as a rolling boulder in a narrow corridor or as complex as a multi-regional organization. However, relevant opposition will add additional option to the challenge, contributing with bonuses, abilities and special effects than will make the challenge more difficult, but more interesting, than otherwise. Often this opposition is in the form of an NPC or a group of NPCs (organization), which will have some signature ability or behaviour. It is important to remember that, because the player’s roll defines success on its own, NPCs do not roll. If a player succeeds in an opposed challenge, it’s because the opposition failed, which mean that NPC do not need to have a character sheet and are, like items, defined by a few descriptors: 

* Goals: Why is the NPC opposing the players? 

* Its actions and abilities: What actions can the NPC attempt to do and what special abilities can it use? Calling on an NPC's ability may be done at will to provide diversity to the conflict. However, some powerful abilities may depend on the player’s luck and be used as part of a critical fumble or when a 1 is rolled.

* Its encounter behaviour: How does the NPC reacts to player’s successes and failures? 

* Its difficulty: How hard will the NPC be to defeat? This is defined by both the NPC challenge rank and the number of accumulated successes required to win. Modifying the number of successes based on a default challenge is an easy way to fine tune an NPC difficulty, while changing the NPC rank will influence both the chances and amounts of success. 

___

In their turns, the players will act. These actions could be a violent attack with a sword, a desperate defence by raising a shield, a quick look around to find something out of place or even just hiding from someone. Most actions may fail, so they will be tied with descriptors with levels *(such as skills)*.  Within a turn, there will be three main types of actions a player can take: <span style="color:green">active actions</span> by the character, <span style="color:green">passive actions</span>  and <span style="color:green">resisting actions</span>  as a result of NPC actions.  Since all actions in a turn occurs as simultaneously as possible, players will get a -1 <span style="color:green">rush penalty</span> for each additional action taken to all actions, reflecting a less precise but faster action. On the other hand, if the player focuses on a single action, the character would get a +1 <span style="color:green">focus bonus</span> due to the additional care put in such an action. As such, it can be thought that all characters start with a +2 bonus every turn and will add a -1 penalty for each action they take *to all 2d6 rolled*. Of note, it is important to notice that players may decide to fail a passive check and that resistance actions are instantaneous and instinctive, so they do not count as a rushed action. Possible actions characters can make on their turns will mostly fall within the following groups:

* Attack: Active action to damage a target in any way (physically, mentally, socially, etc.) 
* Defend: A Passive action used in to prevent damage in response or another character’s action.
* Abilities: Abilities are particular actions that only some characters have access to. Even though this may not be relevant for all games, most of the abilities will be restricted costing damage to a specific descriptor, they may require constant concentration checks to maintain, or they may have specific activation conditions.
* Manoeuvres: Active actions that result in bonuses or penalties due to outmanoeuvring, distracting or discrediting the target. Given that some of these manoeuvres may be considered powerful actions in some settings or games, it is possible to associate them with abilities, critical hits or even only triggering as a free action when a 6 is rolled (or a 1 is rolled against the player). In addition, it may be decided that manoeuvres suffer a -1 manoeuvre difficult penalty by default, due to their more powerful effects.
* Move: In this system, there are no grids, maps or any other sort of objective locations and positions during conflicts. The general layout is described, highlighting particularities that could be used for or against the players. All characters will start in relative positions to the players so tracking space is simplified by defining three regions in relation to the players: near, far and away. Melee and short-range actions can only target in the near area, which ranged actions can have targets in the far area. Only in very particular cases may someone target a character in the away area, as this represents an area outside the conflict zone. It is assumed that the characters are always moving about their area, for example, keeping light on their feet ready to dodge in combat or moving through crows to improve their oratory efficiency, so moving is only required to remove conditions (stand up, clear head), interact with particular items or other characters (reload a weapon, drag a wounded ally, push through) or approach targets in different areas. To move from one zone to another, an unblocked path (may interactions) and full movement (-2 move penalty to all actions) is required.    
 
